Hey look, it works!
# tags python

Apparently the `ipaddr module
<http://docs.python.org/dev/py3k/library/ipaddr.html>`__ in Python 3.1
is disliked by some, and there was a `reasonably robust discussion
<http://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2009-June/089809.html>`__
on python-dev about how it's wrong, wrong, wrong.  `Guido finally
ruled
<http://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2009-June/089840.html>`__:
ixnay on the addr-pay.

This is pretty relevant given the twitstorm caused by Zed
Shaw's `ludicrously self-confident rants
<http://www.zedshaw.com/blog/2009-05-29.html>`__ about `how he always
knows best and is a kickass programmer
<http://www.zedshaw.com/blog/2009-05-30.html>`__ and oh, by the way,
the Python stdlib is kinda lousy in places.  I think the thing to take
away from Zed's rant is that the Python module addition process is, in
fact, moderately FUBARed, with some people able to add perhaps
ill-considered modules while others have to struggle to get the time
of day.  (Aahz's `solution
<http://mail.python.org/pipermail/python-dev/2009-June/089843.html>`__
is good -- require a PEP.)

It's relevant personally, too, as I dig my way through some of pygr's
modules.  It's *way* easier to add code than it is to refactor it,
especially if you don't have a lot of unit tests; if you want to
retain backwards compatibility, you're basically doomed.  DOOOMED, I
say!  And that's why the Python stdlib has so many issues.

(Incidentally, nothing against Zed Shaw -- obnoxiousness is his public
persona, and he's definitely worth listening too -- but it is funny to
realize that all his articles contain arguments that boil down to "he
always knows best and is a kickass programmer."  I especially liked
`his statistics rant
<http://www.zedshaw.com/essays/programmer_stats.html>`__.)

--titus
