SciFoo - am I just jealous?
# tags bioinformatics

I read things like `this report on SciFoo
<http://blog.openwetware.org/scienceintheopen/2008/08/11/notes-from-scifoo/>`__
and think, gawd! I'd have had a great time!  I should try to
beg/bully/buy/brown-nose my way into the next SciFoo so I can talk
about Science 2.0 etc.!

And then I think back to the heady days of ALife when all *that* stuff
was pretty new, and wacky ideas were being proposed, and the
conferences gatherings were crazy interesting and fun, and realize
that -- apart from a lot of great connections, a few publications, and
a wife -- I didn't get much of lasting import from that whole ALife
thing.  What really added to my life, long-term, from that period was
*execution ability*.  I wrote some code, did some research, and ran
conferences; those have all stuck with me.  The people-talking and
socializing didn't stick except in so far as it led to interesting
research (well, and a wife, but I'm not looking for another one of
those).

My assessment is that I really just need to buckle down and *produce*
over the next few years.  This Science 2.0 stuff will come and go, and
I'll adjust as I need to; but since it's unlikely to offer me a
revolutionary way of doing *science*, I'm better off doing good
science *first* and only then worrying about socializing.  (YMMV, esp if
you're Mike Eisen. :)

Also, looking at my work schedule for the last few weeks (talking with
students about their projects; ordering stuff for my lab; discussing
research with my postdoc; and generally getting shit together) it's
hard to argue that there are more important things for me to be doing
than that, at least in the academic sphere.

To put things another way: talk is cheap.  Action speaks louder than
words.  `Ideas multiply execution
<http://www.oreillynet.com/onlamp/blog/2005/08/ideas_are_just_a_multiplier_of.html>`__.

Or perhaps I'm just bitter that I didn't get invited.  It sounds like
fun!

--titus
