Testing Tutorial -- It's Over, Man!
# tags python,pycon,testing

Steve Holden and Doug Napoleone both attended our `testing tutorial
<http://us.pycon.org/2008/tutorials/AgileWebTesing/>`__, (as did AMK,
which was a bit of a surprise!), and had `fairly
<http://holdenweb.blogspot.com/2008/03/practical-applications-of-agile-web.html>`__
`positive <http://www.dougma.com/archives/67>`__ things to say about
it.  This was a relief, because Grig and I always wonder whether or not
this stuff is useful to anyone.

Our hope for this year was to stir things up by making the tutorial
more interactive.  We succeeded to the extent that there were a few
more questions and a bit more interaction, but we would have liked to
get more in the way of pre-tutorial feedback.  In retrospect, the
tutorial might have worked better if two things had happened:

 1. People signing up for the tutorial had actually sent us a bunch of
    things to test.  As it was, we got about 5 e-mails, which didn't
    give us a lot of problem choices; some of the suggested problems
    were out of scope or too big to tackle in the time we had.

    This is not really anyone's fault, although probably Grig and I could
    have done more in advance.

 2. Grig and I had had more time to prepare.

    Both of us are crazy busy (he has a job that is a big timesuck,
    and I am in the middle of a transition from postdoc to prof, which
    means that I'm trying to finish some research while setting up a
    new lab 2000 miles away, PLUS I have a wonderful new daughter who
    is also quite the timesuck.

Now, don't get me wrong -- we did prepare adequately, but I would have
liked a week or so to actually do some Really Cool New Stuff.

I'm not sure what to do next year, if anything.  This was our third
tutorial, and people seem to attend them and like them, but I feel
like we should try something different.  Unfortunately, the lack of
reliable network access really limits our ability to push forward into
doing live tutorials and code writing; Web testing depends on the Web!

Regardless of our thoughts, I am interested in any suggestions that people
may have.  If you've attended our tutorial -- what would you have liked
to see, OR now that you've seen it once, what would you want to see the
second time around, if anything?  If you haven't attended our tutorial,
what would you imagine to be the most interesting "testing tutorial"
possible?

thanks,
--titus
