Evolution of chordate features -- looking at the Molgula
# tags beacon,molgula,chordates

.. @@ references for images

(with `Billie Swalla <http://faculty.washington.edu/bjswalla/>`__)

I've spent the last two weeks out at the `Roscoff Statione Biologique
<http://www.sb-roscoff.fr/>`__ in `Roscoff, France
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roscoff>`__.  This little port is on the
northern coast of the French region of Bretagne, or Brittany.  I'm
here with Billie Swalla, a professor at UW Seattle, and Elijah Lowe, a
Computer Science PhD student from
`Michigan State <http://www.msu.edu>`__.

Why are we here?  Therein lies a tale, about tails.

Roscoff is the only place in the world where you can find two
particular species of ascidians (that is, members of the Tunicata
(Urochordata),
the phylum currently thought to be most closely related to the
vertebrates).  These two species are named Molgula occulta and Molgula
oculata.  In their adult form, they look very similar: they are
little sessile blobs sitting on the ocean floor, covered in sand,
happily filter feeding for a living.  The only apparent difference is
that M. oculata has a white spot between its two siphons, is a little
bit bigger, and likes to cover itself in lighter sand and bigger
rocks.

.. image:: http://ivory.idyll.org/permanent/roscoff/molgula-in-tank.jpg
   :width: 40%

Caption: This picture is of M. oculata; you can see the big 'uns on
the right, with two clear siphons.  You can't see the white spot
between them, however.

When you look at ascidian embryos and larvae, however, you get a very
different picture.  While the adults superficially look nothing like
chordates, the embryos have a characteristic chordate development
(including the rolling up of the neural tube) and the larvae generally
have a notochord and tail.  This is one of the reasons that ascidians
are so interesting to evolutionary biologists: by their embryos they
are clearly chordates, and share relatively recent ancestry (~550-800m
years) with vertebrates, yet they have a lifestyle -- active juvenile
and sessile adult -- shared only by tenured professors.

So these Molgula are ascidians, with tadpole larvae.  And some of them
have tails.  But many do not.  That is, while almost all ascidian larvae
have tails, and the last common ancestor of the Molgula almost
certainly did as well, many of the Molgula species *do not* have a
tail -- and that's why we're in Roscoff.

M. oculata and M. occulta larvae are, respectively, tailed and
tailless.  Otherwise very similar in early development and after
metamorphosis, the oculata larvae (hence "tailed") have tails, while
the occulta larvae (hence "tailless") do not.  M. occulta (tailless)
are also missing an otolith, a gravity-sensing organ present in
M. oculata (tailed) that one would presume is useful during their
motile phase.

.. image:: http://ivory.idyll.org/permanent/roscoff/molgula-larvae.jpg
   :width: 60%

Caption: M. occulta (left) and M. oculata (right) larvae.  Note the
lack of a tail and an otolith (dark spot) on the left, tailless larva.

So here we have two species, quite closely related, living in similar
if not overlapping environments, developing along similar timelines,
with quite distinct morphologies in their tadpole larva phase.  But
that's not all.

The icing on the cake is this: you can interbreed the tailed and
tailless species.  That is, M. oculata sperm can fertilize M.
occulta eggs, and vice versa.  (The details are a bit tricky because
ascidians are hermaphrodites, M. oculata can self-fertilize, and
M. occulta cannot.  So you have to be really careful during the
fertilization stage But never mind.) And what do you get when you
hybridize them?  Little tadpole larvae that have a half-size tail, with
20 notochord cells instead of 40; and an otolith.

.. image:: http://ivory.idyll.org/permanent/roscoff/molgula-hybrids.jpg
   :width: 20%

Caption: A: M. oculata (tailed); B: occulta x oculata hybrid; C:
M. occulta (tailless).

Let me stress that we had no a priori reason to believe that by
crossing tailed and tailless species, we would get a half-tail.  That
would be like a child with brown hair having a blonde parent and a
black-haired parent -- traits don't always average.  In fact, while
you could guess that the hybrids might have a tail, it would be
equally likely (given no other information) that they would have no
tail, or a full-length tail (blonde or black hair, rather than brown).

The fact that hybrids -- from sperm from tailed ascidian and eggs from
a tailless ascidians -- have a tail at all is pretty surprising, and
suggests (Occam's Razor and all that) that the molecular mechanism
underlying tail-less-ness is some sort of loss in the genome.  This is
a decent guess mainly because sperm tend not to have too much in the
way of RNAs or proteins in them: their main contribution to the embryo
is the daddy genome.  If, in contributing their genome, they induce a
trait that was lost in the mommy genome, it is pretty plausible that
they are doing so by re-adding in a genomic locus that was mutated or
lost in the mommy genome.  But we really don't know; understanding
things at that level of molecular detail is a pretty difficult thing
to do.

So these two Molgula are interesting because they have a really
distinct set of features, are closely related enough to hybridize, and
produce interesting hybrids.  They're *particularly* interesting
because they are chordates, and the features that under investigation
are some of the defining features of chordates.

All of this is old hat, in fact, with the hybrids most recently published
on by Swalla and Jeffery in the late 1990s.  (Yes, that *is* the same
Swalla, of course.)

So, what are we doing?  And why I am I involved?

I'll give you a hint -- it involves large-scale sequencing.

A bientot!

--titus
