On Academia

So, I've been wanting to write a bit about why grad school and
academia in general isn't necessarily a waste of time.  Unfortunately
I'm now a white male in a `power position <http://ged.cse.msu.edu/>`__
that depends on me sucking good people into grad school and then
exploiting them, so this may end up sounding entirely self-serving...
not much I can do about that, though ;)

Grad school, for me, was not the way obnoxious gits like `Phil
Greenspun <http://philip.greenspun.com/careers/women-in-science>`__
and `Mencius Moldbug
<http://unqualified-reservations.blogspot.com/2007/08/whats-wrong-with-cs-research.html>`__
portray it.  I didn't do computer science -- my PhD is in biology --
so that may be the difference; but Phil's argument seems to be that
money not only *is* but *should be* inextricably linked to job
satisfaction, and I can tell you that I'm not planning to get paid all
that much anytime soon.  Mencius (that can't be his real name!) says,
"...if anyone with a forehead steeper than a halfpipe has ever
described their work as, for example, "grant-savvy," I am a Cape
buffalo" -- but this is so breathtakingly stupid that it *must* be a
straw man setup.  Mencius also says "...in the first couple years of
grad school [... ] your basic purpose in life is to learn all the
things they forgot to teach you as an undergrad."  I think this is an
interesting point, but I don't know of any PhD programs that are like
that; presumably he's talking about Masters?

Where I think Phil and Mencius are both missing is this: grad school
and beyond are useful places for deep learning of the type that you
simply will not get by working for a business, even Google.  Now, like
any statement about people, that's a 95/5 statement: 5% of
grad-school-worthy people will do fine if you parachute them into
Google at the age of 15.  The other 95%, though, will miss out on
the variety of technologies, opinions, approaches, and (most importantly)
hard work that you will be exposed to in grad school.

Let's focus on that last bit, the "hard work" bit, for a second.  I
only know of a few companies in the world where you might be regularly
pointed at *unsolved*, and often *unsolvable* problems, and then be
told to make progress on them.  This happens to *every* graduate
student that goes to a good grad school.  And, while I know this is an
unpopular opinion, you can only really *learn* with the kind of
in-depth hard work you are forced to do as a graduate student.  That's
*part* of deep learning: being challenged in a serious, systematic
way.

The other part of deep learning is being exposed to a variety of hard
problems from a theoretical point of view.  Every day online I read
about fascinating software developments that originate in deep CS
soil; that people don't recognize this speaks more about their
limitations than about the irrelevance of CS research.  (That's a
topic for another blog post, I think.)  You cannot easily pick this up
by reading blog posts by ADHD millionaries like Phil Greenspun, whose
company failed in part because he himself didn't know the first thing
about developing maintainable software (another research interest of
mine -- but I digress).

So, I agree in principle with Leah Culver when she says that a
`computer science degree is useful
<http://www.leahculver.com/2007/05/30/a-computer-science-degree-doesnt-hurt-much/>`__.

Personally, I'm most excited about something else entirely.  I used my
undergrad math degree and my biology grad school training to get into
two of the hottest and neatest research araes around, comparative
genomics and metagenomics.  There is shit going on in these fields
that is so bleeding edge and interdisciplinary that I can't even
seriously contemplate explaining it to people who don't have PhDs in
biology, 3l33t skillz in programming, and a solid background in
computational science.

And I'll pay you (poorly, it is true) to come work for me on it.

And, fundamentally, that's the bargain you make when you come to grad
school: poor pay in exchange for in-depth larnin' on topics that you
probably never even heard of before your first day in grad school.

I think it's a fair exchange.

YMMV.

--titus
