A Short Review of Halting State
# tags python,books

Some books make me want to leap up out of my chair and go change the world,
or die trying.

`Charles Stross' <http://www.antipope.org/charlie/>`__ `Halting State
<http://www.amazon.com/Halting-State-Charles-Stross/dp/0441014984>`__
is not one of them.

However, it is a darn good read, and -- for those of you who are into
the Internet, Python, MMORPGs, and/or crypto -- it is chock full of
hilarious inside jokes.

(Yes, that's right, I said "Python".  One of the main platforms used
in the book is "Zone", written in "Python".  Does this mean Python has
arrived?  And, more importantly, does it mean that in the near future,
Zope has lost their automatic trademark on Z names in Python?)

**Halting State** is set in the near future, and it is, ostensibly,
about a bank robbery that takes place in a MMORPG, and the police (and
others) who are investigating the robbery.  Unlike some of Stross'
other work -- the Eschaton series, for example -- the writing is
disjointed and the characters are not very well worked out, but the
flavor of this very realistic future seeps through nonetheless.  After
the humor, the next best part of the book was the well-thought-out
speculation on how certain tech problems would work themselves out,
from ARGs to multiple interconnected MMORPGs and even the future of
policing.  As with other good and great sci-fi/tech writers like
Vinge, Stephenson, Sterling, and Gibson, Stross' vision of the near
future is very clear and all too plausible; I wouldn't be surprised if
his predictions are largely accurate.  The only real problem with this
book is that I feel like he didn't take the time to write the story
thoroughly.

Summary judgement: Well worth a read, just don't expect the same level
of brilliance as some of Stross' other work.

--titus
