The sky is falling! The sky is falling!
# tags clowd,bioinformatics,python

I just parachuted in on (and heli'd out of?) the `Beyond the Genome
conference
<http://biomedcentral.cvent.com/EVENTS/Info/Custom.aspx?cid=20&e=89d8be73-d072-43f8-8e35-ec75c44b3a03>`__
in Boston.  I gave a very brief workshop on using EC2 for sequence
analysis, which seemed well received.  (Mind you, virtually everything
possible went wrong, from lack of good network access to lack of
attendee computers to truncated workshop periods due to conference
overrun, but I'm used to the Demo Effect.)

After attending the last bit of the conference, I think that "the
cloud" is actually a really good metaphor for what's happening in
biology these days.  We have an immense science-killing asteroid
heading for us (in the form of ridiculously vast amounts of sequence
data, a.k.a. "sequencing bonanza" -- our sequencing capacity is
doubling every 6-10 months), and we're mostly going about our daily
business because we can't see the asteroid -- it's hidden by the
clouds!  Hence "cloud computing": computing in the absence of clear
vision.

But no, seriously.  Our current software and algorithms simply won't
scale to the data requirements, even on the hardware of the future.  A
few years ago I thought that we really just needed better data
management and organization tools.  Then Chris Lee pointed out how
much a good algorithm could do -- cnestedlist, in `pygr
<http://pygr.org/>`__, for doing fast interval queries on extremely
large databases.  That solved a lot of problems for me.  And then
next-gen sequencing data started hitting me and my lab, and kept on
coming, and coming, and coming... A few fun personal items since my
`Death of Sequencing Centers post
<http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/may-10/grim-future-for-sequencing-centers.html>`__:

 - we managed to assemble some 50 Gb of Illumina GA2 metagenomic data
   using a novel research approach, and then...

 - ...we received 1.6 Tb of HiSeq data from the `Joint Genome
   Institute <http://www.jgi.doe.gov/>`__ as part of the same Great
   Plains soil sequencing project.  It's hard not to think that our
   collaborators were saying "So, Mr. Smarty Pants -- you can develop
   new approaches that work for 100 Gb, eh?  Try *this* on for size!
   BWAHAHAHAHAHAHA!"

 - I've been working for the past two weeks to do a lossy (no, NOT
   "lousy") assembly of 1.5 billion reads (100 Gb) of mRNAseq Illumina data
   from lamprey, using a derivative research approach to the one above,
   and then...

 - ...our collaborators at `Mt. Sinai Medical Center
   <http://www.mountsinai.org/>`__ told us that that we could expect
   200 Gb of lamprey mRNA HiSeq data from their next run.

   (See BWAHAHAHAHAHAHAHA, above.)

Honestly, I think most people *in* genomics, much less biology, don't
appreciate the game-changing nature of the sequencing bonanza.  In
particular, I don't think they realize the rate at which it's scaling.
Lincoln Stein had a great slide in his talk at the BTG workshop about
the game-changing nature of next-gen sequencing:

.. image:: http://ivory.idyll.org/permanent/lstein-ngs-capacity.png
   :width: 300

The blue line is hardware capacity, the yellow line is "first-gen"
sequencing (capillary electrophoresis), and the red line is next-gen
sequencing capacity.

It helps if you realize that the Y axis is log scale.

Heh, yeah.

Now, reflect upon *this*: many sequence analysis algorithms (notably,
assembly, but also multiple sequence alignment and really anything
that doesn't rely on a fixed-size "reference") are supra-linear in
their scaling.

Heh, yeah.

We call this "Big Data", yep yep.

At the cloud computing workshop, I heard someone -- I won't say who,
because even though I picked specifically on them, it's a common
misconception -- compare computational biology to physics.  Physicists
and astronomers had to learn how to deal with Big Data, right?  So we
can, too! Yeah, but colliders and telescopes are *big*, and
*expensive*.  Sequencers?  Cheap.  Almost every research institution I
know has at least one, and often two or three.  Every *lab* I know
either has some Gb-sized data set or is planning to generate 1-40 Gb
within the next year.  Take that graph above, and extrapolate to 2013
and beyond.  Yeah, that's right -- all your base belong to us,
physical scientists!  Current approaches are not going to scale well
for big projects, no matter what custom infrastructure you build or
rent.

The closest thing to this dilemma that I've read about is in climate
modeling (see: `Steve Easterbrook's blog, Serendipity
<http://www.easterbrook.ca/steve/?p=1933>`__).  However, I think the
difference with biology is that we're generating new scientific data,
not running modeling programs that generate our data.  Having been in
both situations, I can tell you that it's very different when your
data is not something you can decline to measure, or something you can
summarize and digest more intelligently while generating it.

I've also heard people claim that this isn't a big problem compared
to, say, the problems that we face with Big Data on the Internet.  I
think the claim at the time was that "in biology, your data is more
structured, and so you haff vays of dealing with it".  Poppycock!  The
unknown unknowns *dominate*, everyone: we often *don't know* what
we're looking for in large-scale biological data.  When we do know,
it's a lot easier to devise data analysis strategies; but when we
don't really know, people tend to run a *lot* of different analyses,
looking looking looking.  So in many ways we end up with an added
polynomial-time exploratory computation scaling (trawling through N
databases with M half-arsed algorithms) on top of all the other
"stuff" (Big Data, poorly scaling algorithms).

OK, OK, so the sky is falling.  What do we do about it?

I don't see much short-term hope in cross-training more people,
despite my efforts in that direction (see: `next-gen course
<http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/jun-10/ngs-course-postmortem.html>`__,
and `the BEACON course
<http://ged.msu.edu/courses/2010-fall-cse-891/>`__).  Training is a
medium-term effort: necessary but not all that helpful in the short
term.

It's not clear that `better computational science
<http://www.nature.com/news/2010/101013/full/467775a.html>`__ is a
solution to the sequencing bonanza.  Yes, most bioinformatics software
has problems, and I'm sure most analyses are wrong in many ways --
including ours, before you ask.  It's a general problem in scientific
computation, and it's aggravated by a lack of training, and we're
working on that, too, with things like `Software Carpentry
<http://swc.scipy.org/>`__.

I do see two lights at the end of the tunnel, both spurred by our own
research and that of Michael Schatz (and really the whole `Salzberg
<http://www.cbcb.umd.edu/~salzberg/>`__/`Pop
<http://www.cbcb.umd.edu/~mpop/>`__ gang) as well as `Narayan Desai's
<http://www.mcs.anl.gov/about/people_detail.php?id=280>`__ talk at the
BTG workshop.

First, we need to *change the way analysis scales* -- see esp. Michael
Schatz's work on `assembly in the cloud
<http://www.cshl.edu/Faculty/schatz-michael>`__, and (soon, hopefully)
our own work on scaling metagenomic and mRNAseq assembly.  Michael's
code isn't available (tsk tsk) and ours is available but isn't
documented, published, or easy to use yet, but we can now do "exact"
assemblies of 100 Gb of metagenomic, and we're moving towards
nearly-exact assemblies of arbitrarily large RNAseq and metagenomic
data sets.  (Yes, "arbitrary".  Take THAT, JGI.)

We will have to do this kind of algorithmic scaling on a case-by-case
basis, however.  I'm focused on certain kinds of sequence analysis,
personally, but there's a huge world of problems out there that will
need constant attention to scale them in the face of the new data.
And right now, I don't see too many CSE people focused on this, because
they don't see the need to scale to Tb.

Second, Big Data and cloud computing are, combined, going to dynamite
the traditional HPC model and make it clear that our only
hope is to work *smarter* and develop better algorithms, in
combination with scaling compute power.  How so?

As Narayan has eloquently argued many times, it no longer makes sense
for most institutions to run their own HPC, if you take into account
the true costs of power, AC, and hardware.  The only reason it *looks*
like HPCs work well is because of the way institutions play games with
funny money (a.k.a. `"overhead charges"
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Overhead_%28business%29>`__), channeling
it to HPC behind the scenes - often with much politicking involved.
If, as a scientist, your compute is "free" or even heavily subsidized,
you tend not to think much about it.  But now that we have to scale
those clusters 10s or 100s or 1000s of X, to deal with data 100s or
1e6s of times as big, institutions will no longer be able to afford to
build their own clusters with funny money.  And they'll have to charge
scientists for the true computational cost of their work -- or
scientists will have to use the cloud.  Either way, people will be
exposed to how much it *really* costs to run, say, BLAST against
100,000,000 short reads.  And soon thereafter they'll stop doing such
foolish things.

In turn, this will lead to a significant effort to make better use of
hardware, either by building better algorithms or asking questions
more cleverly.  (Goodbye, BLAST!)  It hurts me to say that, because
I'm not algorithmically focused by nature; but if you want to know the
answer to a biological question, and you have the data, but existing
approaches can't handle it within your budget... what else are you
going to do but try to ask, or answer, the question more cleverly?
Narayan said something like "we'll have to start asking if $150/BLAST
is a *good deal* or not" which, properly interpreted, makes the point
well: it's a great deal if you have $1000 and only one BLAST to do,
but what if you have 500 BLASTs?  And didn't budget for it?

Fast, cheap, good.  Choose two.

Better algorithms and more of a focus on their importance (due to the
exposure of true costs) are two necessary components to solving this
problem, and there are increasingly many people working on them.
So I think there are these two lights at the end of the tunnel for the
Big Data-in-biology challenges.  And probably there are some others
that I'm missing. Although, of course, these two lights at the end of
tunnel may be train headlights, but we can hope, right?

--titus

p.s. `Chris Dagdigian
<http://www.bioteam.net/company/leadership.html>`__ from BioTeam gave
an absolutely awesome talk on many of these issues, too.  Although he
seems more optimistic than I am, possibly because he's paid by the hour
:).
