MSU Position
# tags personal,python,software

Just a short note to say that I've taken a faculty position at
Michigan State University, in Lansing, Michigan.  The position is
split 65%/35% between the Computer Science and Microbiology &
Molecular Genetics departments, and I expect to be working on a fairly
wide range of problems.  My computational "focus" (such as it is) will
be on applying effective computational techniques to biological data;
I also will be doing experimental (wet-bench) research in vertebrate
developmental gene regulatory networks.

One of the big changes that the MSU Computer Science department is
contemplating is changing their intro CSE classes over to some mix of
Python and C++.  I'll probably be helping with that. Also, I think one
of the reasons they hired me to is to introduce more open source and
"agile" testing technology into the CSE curriculum there, so expect to
see some posts about that soon.

I'll be starting at MSU in August 2008, a year and a half from now.

If you're interested in getting a Masters or PhD in computer science,
and like the look of `MSU's CSE department
<http://www.cse.msu.edu/>`__ please `contact me
<mailto:titus@idyll.org>`__.  I'd very much like to attract open
source/Python/Web people to the department, and you wouldn't
necessarily have to work with me -- there's plenty of other people
there.  I'm not so familiar with other people yet, but my friend
Charles Ofria runs the `Digital Evolution Lab
<http://devolab.cse.msu.edu/>`__, which does fantastic research.

(And, obviously, if you're interested in gene regulatory networks,
developmental biology, regulatory genomics, and bioinformatics in
general then we should talk...)

--professor titus
