A slightly more thoughtful post on diversity
# tags diversity

(Some more meanderings on the brouhaha about diversity in the Python world.)

First, I've removed 'python' from the tags and made sure that neither
Planet Python nor Advogato feed from this blog otherwise; I suspect by
talking about politics and feelings in OSS I'm getting further from my
normal target audience, and I don't want to spam the entire community.

Second, because my last two replies directly into a
diversity-list-inspired discussion have inspired blowback of the form
"why are you such a jerk for not supporting women/minorities in
Python?", I want to CMA and point out that I'm completely in favor of
increasing the diversity of the Python community, and I'd like to
publish a community-wide diversity statement.  Heck, I could probably
convince you that I've worked reasonably hard over the last three
years to bring women into the community.  Unfortunately, expressing
skepticism about statements like this: "...publishing a diversity
statement is one of the only things that *works*" apparently means "I
don't like women in my programming community" to some people, even
though that's not what I meant by it at all.  (If you're interested,
what I meant was that Kirrily Robert's `post/talk
<http://infotrope.net/blog/2009/07/25/standing-out-in-the-crowd-my-oscon-keynote/>`__
about how AO3 and Dreamwidth *created* communities with a more
representative balance of men and women by, among other things,
posting a diversity statement, DID NOT AUTOMATICALLY IMPLY that such a
tactic would do much in the long-established Python community -- even
though that was what some people were implying, and what GvR actually
*stated* in an e-mail.  See how controversial I am?)

I've also been astonished to watch otherwise sane and reasonable
people embroil themselves in this discussion with good intentions but
... poor implementation of those intentions.  When one person (who I
know somewhat and respect as far as I know them) said that the PSF's
discussion of the diversity statement "violated" their expectations, I
had to throw up my hands and laugh somewhat ruefully; was that really
the least inflammatory choice of words that that person could have
used??  (There were many more examples, but that one stuck out in my
head as possible the least appropriate word choice I'd seen that day.)
The discussions seemed to often boil down to people questioning the
precise meaning of specific words, frequently by choosing the most
narrow and least positive meaning possible.  That is not a productive
way to discuss something, folks.

**Perhaps the most disappointing aspect of this whole discussion has
been the disappearance of the normal assumption between long-term
Python contributors that we all mean well to each other.**

Perhaps because of this, I've gotten a number of private e-mails from
people in the Python community expressing feelings of *isolation* from
the community on this topic, either because they don't feel strongly
about the topic or they feel their opinions are not welcome.  Given
what happened to me after expressing an honest inquisitive opinion
about why women didn't feel comfortable coming forward in the Python
community, I can hardly blame them; the Thought Police were out in
force, and there's no winning when someone implies that you either
agree with them completely **or** you're a bigoted misogynist asshole.
(That would be me, incidentally!)

So why do I keep thinking about this so much, anyway?  (To give you an
idea of *how* much, I have two other posts in the pipeline that
address this issue and I've read more e-mail and had more
conversations about this in the last two weeks than any other
topic... I'm debating deleting the posts, you'll be happy to know ;)
Partly it's because of my general surprise at the inflammatory nature
of this discussion in the generally fairly friendly Python community,
and partly it's because I liked & respected the guy who (in
paraphrase) called me a bigoted misogynist asshole and I still very
much respect the guy (GvR) who called me a wanker and asked if I'd
actually *read* Kirrily Robert's post (I had, and I stand by my point
of logic).  I don't like losing potential friends for stupid reasons,
and I think you can probably understand my feelings about the author
of the wanker comment...

Today while driving I thought about this topic some more, and settled
on something specific that I actually think is worth addressing:
namely, could this whole topic have worked its way through the Python
community with fewer misunderstandings and in a less inflammatory way?
There are a couple of things I would suggest doing *next* time, if
there is a next time for a topic of a similarly divisive nature.

Zeroth, I don't think there's any way the diversity list could have
been made more pleasant for me.  By nature I'm very much a skeptic,
and that was a poor fit for the list.  (I'm glad I joined, though; the
links and discussions that I read while on that list were indeed
eye-opening.) What, then, would I have changed?

First, I would have communicated the diversity statement to the PSF
list with a request for a simple up-down vote by the membership, along
with an additional request that anyone who thought that it was worth
discussing in detail move over to the diversity list itself.  There
was quite a lot (QUITE a lot) of duplicated discussion on the PSF
list.

Second, I would have tried to keep the diversity list better informed
about the depth of the discussion going on in the PSF list.  One
problem with mailing lists is that you tend not to realize that
everyone else isn't on them; with closed mailing lists, this is even
more of a problem!  Perhaps because of this at least a few people
seemed to think that the PSF members had read the diversity statement
generated by the diversity list and collectively shitcanned it without
much discussion.  Not so, my friends - we had *lots* of discussions!
I can give you screenshots of my mailbox if you doubt me ;)

A third thing I might have tried would have been to gather more
background material than a few blog posts for people who wanted to
read more.  (This is definitely 20-20 hindsight; I didn't realize how
much material was easily accessible on things like increasing
diversity in the sciences!  That's one of the blog posts I have queued
up...)  Blog posts are almost necessarily advocating something, and to
do so they take a biased perspective on that topic.  That bias can in
turn bias conversations.  I'm reasonably certain that the diversity
list is ignoring possible options because of the set of background
reading material that was sent to the list.  Watch This Space?

Oh, and fourth, I probably would have tried to make a stronger effort
to make the point that a diversity statement is almost certainly not
going to matter in the slightest without substantial backup efforts.
(This point was made by several people, but didn't seem to percolate
effectively in the face of disagreements about 'the' vs 'a'.)  I will
post a viciously disappointed post about this if I don't get good
turnout for GHOP.

This is all debatable and in hindsight, and I certainly wouldn't have
thought that the topic would blow up to this extent in advance.

I will always have more to say on this topic but I think I'd better
cut my losses while only *half* the community thinks I'm a bigoted
misogynist asshole wanker... ;)

--titus

p.s. Comments welcome from the Python community, except from that one
guy.

p.p.s.  Does anyone else on either list find it strange that so many
messages were exchanged on both lists without much comment in the
Python blogosphere?
