Open Science, and Risk/Benefit Analysis
# tags beacon,science,science20

In thinking about `open science and open communication about science
<http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/aug-10/science-and-open-science>`__, I've
always been frustrated by the people who claim that the risks
outweight the benefit.  Their arguments seem sound if you buy into a
certain kind of logic (the creationists will try to twist whatever you
say!  the climate change deniers will use your words in ways you did
not intend! people will steal your research! you cannot communicate
openly about what you're doing!) but I could never pin down why I felt
that way.  I had a eureka moment about it today, though.

When someone tells me that (for example) we should not make all
`BEACON research proposals <http://www.beacon.msu.edu>`__ fully public
because they will be misinterpreted by creationists and used against
us, they are saying this: in their personal opinion, the *identified
risks* outweight the *identified benefits*.  They already *know* (and
I agree that this will happen) that people will take the BEACON-funded
study of -- for example -- `some fascinating tailless ascidians
<http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/aug-10/about-those-molgula.html>`__ as a
scientific boondoggle, an excuse for a trip to France that won't
result in anything but more incomprehensible literature about chordate
origins.  And they can't imagine that, without careful shaping of the
message and management of the public image, this will not happen.
Since there's no particularly obvious benefit to posting them
publicly, the risks (of misinterpretation) outweigh the benefits (of
some nebulous "open science" thingy).  So halt! the publication.

Same arguments apply to climate change (but they'll just
misuse/misinterpret the data!) and open science in general (but
someone will just steal my data/ ideas/...!)

This is fundamentally a **failure of imagination**.  It is doing a
risk analysis based on your worst fears, and neglecting a benefit
analysis of your wildest hopes.

For examples:

In the case of BEACON, we have a sprawling collection of 100 faculty
spread across 5 institutions.  I have literally no idea what more than
half of them are doing.  Wouldn't it be great if I could do a text
search of their proposals, and even better if I could stumble across a
BEACON colleague in a Google search on some topic or other? Or if we
could attract students that didn't even know they were interested in
"evolution in action", but came to our Web site based on Google's
indexing of a rich array of research projects and then found
themselves hooked?

What about the climate change skeptic (or agnostic) who suddenly gets
a chance to sit down and look at all the data and can conclude that
hey, this is actually really complicated?  And it's probably not as
simple as the skeptics claim?  (Aside: I'm unbelievably pissed at the
climate change community for the idiocy of their current closed-ness.)

And what about the collaborators that I could get (and am getting) from
posting about some of our projects?  In the worst case, I post about
things and no one pays any attention; in the best case that I can
think of, I make connections and establish cred that enables future
collaborations, publications, and grant opportunities.  (This is
already happening.)

At the heart of science is an ethos that *has* to include openness in
order to work properly.  Any constriction in the flow of ideas and the
interchange of opinions is a block in the very lifeblood of science
itself.  If we indulge those who argue against free communication, we
are preventing not only some imagined negative consequences, but all
of the happy coincidences that are beyond our limited imaginations.

So turn on, tune in, and don't drop out.

--titus
