On mentoring
# tags mentoring,teaching

One of the most important jobs a professor has is to pay it forward:
that is, to teach, train, mentor, support, and open up opportunities
for their students and postdocs.  It's a job that is undervalued by
those who focus on the short term -- the administrators and review
committees that judge us by the money we bring in and the papers we
publish.  It's a misunderstood job, as well; the goal of a good mentor
is not to mold their students in their own image, but to push them; to
expand their horizons, not to contract them around the mentor's own
views.  And it's probably one of the two or three most rewarding parts
of the job (surpassed only by the fun of actually doing the research!)

I came to academia to do science: to research biology, and to solve
problems that are as yet unsolved.  And my goal is to become a good
researcher, and to solve really hard problems well; hopefully that
will be part of whatever legacy I have.  But it's increasingly clear
to me that the best, most lasting legacy possible is to train the next
generations of scientists in doing good science, be it in industry or
academia.  For example, my father trained nearly 100 PhD students
during his research career, and always felt that his training record
was one of his most impactful contributions -- many of those 100
students are professors today, doing their own training.  Pay it
forward, indeed!

Recently, I realized that if I drop dead tomorrow (or don't get tenure
in three years -- same thing, right?) I would still have touched a
number of people's lives in really positive ways.  For example, I
received an e-mail from one student that participated in GSoC, telling
me that she felt she had learned an immense amount about
self-sufficiency and the value of making an effort from that
experience.  I hired another student to do lab grunt work; she ended
up liking science, switching majors, graduating, and has now received
several national fellowships and is going to graduate school.  I don't
take credit for much past hiring her, but if I hadn't hired her, she
would not have had the opportunity to show how good she is.  Blogging
and writing tutorials counts, too: at PyCon, 2-3 people a year come up
to me and tell me how much they appreciate one or another of my blog
posts or tutorials.  Even class teaching can be impactful -- at
graduation recently, an entire group of CS students told me how much
they'd enjoyed my class on Web dev, with one particular student
introducing me to her parents as "one of the good ones".

It's hard to overstate how fantastic it is to watch students grow and
change.

Despite the joys of transforming lives, many professors only want to
take energetic, intelligent, well-spoken, well-trained students.  Yet
these students are the ones that already have opportunities, and
frankly need less mentoring than others -- they already "get it", and
really just need experience.  Providing that experience is valuable,
and a key part of training.  But the same professors that jump at the
4.0 GPA student who speaks English natively and has tons of energy
will turn down opportunities to take students from non-research
intensive institutions, or unfocused students who come from
non-academic backgrounds, or people who haven't the faintest idea what
science is.  And I think they do themselves and the students a
disservice.  These students simply have never seen the same
opportunities that many students at (e.g.) MSU take for granted; the
difference you could make in their lives dwarfs the impact you'd make
on most better prepared students.

It's worth remembering that at some point we all start as
wet-behind-the-ears youngsters that have never confronted a problem
without an answer.  **Someone took a chance on us** -- maybe it was easier
to get that chance for those of us from a top-ranked institution, with
an academic background (...me), or maybe it was a random "hey, do you
want to work for me over the summer?"  chance (...lots of people), or
maybe it was an organized program to introduce underrepresented
minorities to research (...lots of people).  Now that you're a grad
student, or a postdoc, or a professor, or an open source hacker with
commit privileges to a dozen projects, **take that chance**.  It's a
lot of work but it can be more rewarding than pretty much anything
else.

If I have a point with this blog post, it's this: one of the
privileges of academia, and mentoring programs like GSoC, is being put
in a position where you can touch many people's lives, as a mentor and
a teacher.  Do so!  Take chances on people!  Lay out some expectations
and see who rises to meet them, and then chase down those that don't
understand what to do.  Don't start out with the expectation that you
must be, or will be, rewarded in kind -- many students take years to
be productive, may end up working on something completely different
with someone else, and may never even say thanks.  But that's OK, if
you don't treat teaching and undergraduate research as a way to get
more work done ('cause honestly, it's not), but rather as an
opportunity to introduce the joys of your work to people who may have
no idea that such awesome jobs exist.  Pay it forward.

--titus
