DRAFT: A community-focused pre-publication data release and sharing policy for sequence data
# tags openscience

This is a draft proposal of a policy to encourage pre-publication data
release and data sharing within a community.  This policy is based on
discussions at the Cephalopod Genomics Workshop (a Catalysis workshop
sponsored by NESCent).

Note, this is made available under a `CC-BY-SA
<http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/2.0/>`__ license permitting
use and re-use with attribution.  Although it's still a draft, we hope
you'll find it useful.

Authors, in alphabetical order:

 - C Titus Brown
 - Brian Dilkes
 - Eric Edsinger-Gonzales
 - Robert M. Freeman, Jr.
 - Erich M. Schwarz

with contributions by members of the Cephalopod community, incuding
Wendy Crookes-Goodson and Clifton Ragsdale.

---

Genomic and transcriptomic data is most useful in aggregate, and the
interests of fostering community use and serendipitous discovery must
be balanced by due concern for issues of publication, funding, and
career recognition. We therefore propose a pre-publication data
sharing policy and a minimal set of analyses that would drive
"virtuous" data sharing behavior to encourage re-use, and provide the
maximum benefit to the cephalopod community from people within and
without the current community.

Specifically,

1. A data policy that supports the rapid and broadest possible sharing
   of a subset of data, subject to significant restrictions on certain
   types of usage.

2. A minimal set of automated analyses of submitted, raw data,
   including perhaps genomic contig assembly (not necessarily including
   scaffolding across repeats, het region collapse, etc., but just
   something quick and dirty) and RNA-seq assembly.  These automated
   analyses could take advantage of all submitted data
   (e.g. co-assembling from multiple RNA-seq data types) but would be
   anonymized and 'flattened' so that proprietary (original) data cannot
   be reconstructed in order to protect the original lab which created
   the data. Links to more polished data sets can be added as they arise.

3. A minimal (but potentially very useful!) set of user-based
   analyses, including most especially BLAST, such that visitors (who
   have agreed to the data sharing policy) are able to search for
   specific genes by sequence similarity across the database.

4. Precomputed analyses of the aggregate data set for "obvious"
   considerations such as homology across species, searches against nr or
   RefSeq, etc.  Underlying protocols / pipelines and settings will be
   made explicit.

5. Bulk availability and download of all submitted data sets in
   support of aggregate reanalyses and assembly, but only by explicit
   agreement with the Cephalopod Genomics steering committee. Some
   mechanism will be implemented to notify the source lab of the
   persons/lab downloading the information so that potential
   collaborations can be created.

---

(...include example cases that are in/appropriate uses...)

We note that the Metazome site, for example, provides much of this
functionality. GMOD and Maker might serve as a basic technical
foundation for an independent Web site.

---

Specific language for the data sharing policy agreement:
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

For example, the JGI data release policy specifies immediate release
of raw read data, assemblies, and automated annotations,

   http://my.jgi.doe.gov/general/datarelease.html

with a number of reserved analyses:

   http://genome.jgi-psf.org/pages/data-usage-policy.jsf

More specifically,

Reserved analyses include the identification of complete (whole
genome) sets of genomic features such as genes, gene families,
regulatory elements, repeat structures, GC content, phylogeny, etc.,
and whole-genome comparisons of regions of evolutionary conservation
or change. (Studies of any type on the reserved data sets that are not
in direct competition with those planned by the JGI and its
collaborators may also be undertaken following an agreement to that
effect. Interested parties are encouraged to contact the principal
collaborator and JGI to discuss such possibilities.)

Note that data generated by US funding is subject to (at a minimum)
the Fort Lauderdale agreement,

   http://biowiki.org/FortLauderdaleAgreement

which "reaffirms a balance between fair use (i.e. no preemptive
publication) and early disclosure."

Whichever data policy is ultimately adopted, we believe that it should
be implemented as a "click through" license with username/IP address
recorded, such that anyone from any community may agree to it and gain
access to the data.  Any data (and any derived analyses) posted on the
site would then be automatically subject to this minimum data policy.

Some suggested phrasing:

"Our policy is that early release should aid the progress of science."

---
