Thoughts on open science -- my response to Eli Kintisch
#######################################################

:author: C\. Titus Brown
:tags: open science
:date: 2014-06-12
:slug: 2014-eli-conversation
:category: science

`Eli Kintisch <http://news.sciencemag.org/author/eli-kintisch>`__
(`@elikint <https://twitter.com/elikint>`__) just wrote a very nice
`article on "Sharing in Science"
<http://sciencecareers.sciencemag.org/career_magazine/previous_issues/articles/2014_06_10/caredit.a1400146>`__
for Science Careers; his article contained quotes from my MSU
colleague `Ian Dworkin <https://www.msu.edu/~idworkin/>`__ as well as
from me.

When Eli sent me an e-mail with some questions about open science, I
responded at some length (hey, I type fast and have lots of
opinions!).  Having been through this before, I knew that he would use
maybe four sentences at most, but that seemed like a waste!  So I told
him I'd like to post the entire e-mail response once his article came
out.  Here it is!  I've edited a few things to make them clearer or
'cause I felt like it.

----

1. How has sharing code, data, R methods helped scientific research in one or
   two specific examples?

One personal story -- we have a technical approach (called digital
normalization) that we have yet to publish.  We posted a paper draft
on a preprint site and made the software available almost 3 years ago,
however.  The approach makes certain kinds of difficult sequence
analyses much easier, and makes some other previously impossible
analyses now possible.  (We've published some of these results -- see
`www.pnas.org/content/early/2014/03/13/1402564111.abstract
<http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2014/03/13/1402564111.abstract>`__
-- just not the approach itself.)

Since we made the approach available, hundreds or thousands of people
have used it.  A derivative approach is now part of two major software
packages (the Trinity and Mira assemblers), it's been used in about 15
publications, and is soon to appear in dozens more, and it's basically
been quite a success.  All prepub.

It's hard to cite another clear example in my area of expertise, in
part because in genomics data and software tend to be freely available
prepub, so it's more the default.  There are big wins like the human
genome project and the ENCODE project, where the data (and code, in
the case of ENCODE) were made freely and openly available, and this
has obviously accelerated science.

Hmm.

This is a good article to the state of things in my field (the top bit,
at any rate):

http://massgenomics.org/2013/06/data-sharing-embargo.html

2. How has data sharing impacted your career? Do you think it could help you
   get tenure? Some say that faculty comittees do not consider this.

My career has developed in large part *because* I've been open about
everything.  In addition to making my software methods open, and
posting my papers, and making all my educational materials available,
I blog and tweet about everything.  I'm pretty well known largely
because of this.

So I would make three points.

One is, going forward, data (and code) sharing will be an expectation.
Program managers and funding organizations are eager to see their
funding put to maximum use, and this includes making as much data and
code available as possible.

Second -- because of this, it will soon be the norm for new faculty.
You will no longer stand out if you do it (like I do now) but if you
don't do it (because then you will no longer get published or receive
grants).  It may take 5-10 years for this to be the new norm but I
think it's inevitable.  Of course, many details need to be worked out,
but the incentives for doing so are going to be there.

Third -- everyone knows what tenure and promotion committees care
about.  It's funding and reputation (which usually means papers and
invitations to speak).  These can be beneficiaries of openness, and in
fact I would argue that my success so far is a direct example: I have
received grants where the reviewers cited my openness, and many of my
invitations to go speak (i.e.  reputation builders) are from my online
presence.  So I don't expect what committees care about to change, but
I do expect the paths to those reputational results to expand in
number and variety to include openness as one of the core mechanisms.

3. What barriers exist in your mind to more people sharing their work
   in this way?

Culture and training are the two main ones.  The culture discourages
people from doing it, because it's new and edgy and people don't know
how to think about it.  The training is a block because even people
who are ideologically disposed towards openness (which is, in fact,
most scientists, I believe) don't know where to get started.

4. Is R Open Science important and if so why?

I'm the wrong person to ask :).  rOpenSci are doing things right, as
far as I can tell, but I don't actually use R myself so I've never
used their software.  So from my perspective their main utility is in
showing that their approach isn't fatal.  Which is awesome

5. Any practical tips to scientists you'd share on making sharing easier?

Just ... get started!  Post figures and posters to `figshare
<http://figshare.com>`__.  Make your published data openly available
and easy to use, i.e. in the format that you would have wished for it
to be delivered in for your paper.  Make your methods explicit.  Post
preprints at `bioRxiv <http://biorxiv.org/>`__ if the journal is ok
with it.  If there's a technical barrier that prevents you from doing
something, note it and move on, but don't let it stop you from doing
something else.

--titus
