I've been involved in the open source community for nearly 27 years,
and I've been working in science for about 22 years, and I would
dearly love to see many of the practices common in open source become
part of science -- what you might call "open science" (Fernando Perez
and Jarrod Millman have `made a strong and wonderful case for the open
source community embodying the ideal of science
<http://www.jarrodmillman.com/oss-chapter.html>`__, if you're
interested in reading more.)

One thing that I do not want to see, however, is the hostility and
argumentative aspect of open source communities transferred
wilhe-nilhe into open science.  In particular, the Python community
has spent the last 10 years climbing out of the diversity and
participation hole created in large part by the tech community's toxic
culture, and as one area where science is actually *more* inclusive
than the tech community, I hope we can avoid digging that hole anew
in science.

This isn't easy, needless to say.  Of particular note, I've been a
long-time participant in one community that sits at the intersection
of science and open source -- the Software Carpentry community.  The
mailing lists are *still* remarkably uninclusive despite strong
leadership and many attempts to make them more inclusive.  I know many
people who simply won't touch these public discussions with a ten-foot
pole.

And this is why I'm not *just* tremendously impressed by the
discussion on Lior Pachter's "P-value prize
<https://liorpachter.wordpress.com/2015/05/26/pachters-p-value-prize/>`__
blog post, but also *tremendously saddened.* The discussion, while
tremendously valuable, also exhibited all of the characteristics of an
alpha-male tech discussion - it was `dominated by men
<https://twitter.com/mbeisen/status/608276918618583040>`__, contained
`broader and off-topic strongly-worded commentary
<https://liorpachter.wordpress.com/2015/05/26/pachters-p-value-prize/#comment-4397>`__,
`exhibited point scoring
<https://liorpachter.wordpress.com/2015/05/26/pachters-p-value-prize/#comment-4403>`__,
`displayed ad hominems
<https://liorpachter.wordpress.com/2015/05/26/pachters-p-value-prize/#comment-4409>`__,
`and resulted in challenges
<https://liorpachter.wordpress.com/2015/05/26/pachters-p-value-prize/#comment-4506>`__.
Most of the commenters were tenured faculty, too.  There's `evidence
that the vast majority of readers didn't comment
<https://liorpachter.wordpress.com/2015/06/09/i-was-wrong/>`__, which
suggests that the discussion heavily skewed towards tenured guys.

Despite all of this, it is held up as `a model of post-publication
peer review <http://www.michaeleisen.org/blog/?p=1718>`__.  Hmm. To
quote Richard Smith-Unna, "if that blog post is what PPPR
(post-publication peer review) is going to look like, that's a pretty
bleak future".

What can we do to fix this?

----

One thing we can do is anticipate, based on the open source
community's extensive and bitter experience, the kinds of problems
we'll see.  Here's an off-the-cuff classification scheme for obnoxious
participation in public discussions:

1. Some participants are upset that they are making a clearly superior
   technical argument (or at least one that should be considered) and
   simply cannot understand why others are not engaging intellectually
   with their argument.

2. Other participants are full of rage and anger at the obvious stupidity
   of the current situation, and vent their spleen on the discussion.

3. Yet other participants view a public discussion as a way to score
   points and increase their public reputation as a wise and technically
   savvy person.

4. And, finally, there are people who simply cannot stop arguing.

5. Well, and then there are the trolls, who do it for the lulz and
   will take advantage of any forum that doesn't have strong
   moderation to poke and prod people mercilessly. (Read `Hacker,
   Hoaxer, Whistleblower, Spy
   <http://www.amazon.com/Hacker-Hoaxer-Whistleblower-Spy-Anonymous/dp/1781685835>`__
   for some great examples of this culture!)

I would argue that none of these are things we want to see in an post-pub
peer review culture (although #3 is inevitable).  There are several
potential ways to deal with this, but they all hinge on two things:

* first, having a clear policy about comments and posting;

* second, having moderators that enforce that policy.

One suggestion from the `Ally Skills workshop I attended at PyCon
<http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/2015-pycon-ally-workshop.html>`__ towards
having responsible Internet discussions was that a Code of Conduct be
emplaced and enforced, along with guidelines and policies for
comments.  The two specific pointers were `this Code of Conduct
<https://github.com/confcodeofconduct/confcodeofconduct.com>`__ and
`Captain Awkward's <https://twitter.com/cawkward>`__ site `commenting
policies <http://captainawkward.com/site-policies-and-faqs/>`__;
there's more general discussion of how to have women-friendly forums
`on the geek feminism wiki
<http://geekfeminism.wikia.com/wiki/Women-friendly_forums>`__, which
is a great resource.

Once posted, someone needs to make sure commenters adhere to these
policies. In my preferred future, where PPPR happens on blogs and
journal/preprint sites, moderation would be managed by the site owner
as part of their hosting responsibilities.

----

No strong conclusion yet <- goes here.
