NGS course 2015 - three weeks of computing, at a lake!
######################################################

:author: C\. Titus Brown
:tags: ngs-course
:date: 2015-03-27
:slug: 2015-summer-course-NGS
:category: teaching

I've just opened applications for `the 2015 summer course on Analyzing
Next Generation Sequencing Data
<http://bioinformatics.msu.edu/ngs-summer-course-2015>`__.  The course
will run from August 10th through August 21st; for details, `see the
course information page
<http://bioinformatics.msu.edu/ngs-summer-course-2015>`__.

This year there will also be a third week of the course that is
invitation-only.  This third week is devoted to the topics of
up/re-skilling, reproducibility, and data integration.  It will be
much more loosely organized than the first two weeks, with a few
lectures and practicals around a lot of open time.  I hope the third
week will serve three purposes: it should be

1) an opportunity for alumni of the course to engage with updated materials;
   we now have 120 or so alumni, and I know that a reasonably significant
   number of them now do this sort of thing for a living.  They can come
   hang out and go through the newer materials with some support.

2) a way for some of the course instructors to evaluate and trial the
   teaching of newer technology (e.g. Docker) for enabling
   reproducible computing.

3) a meeting of the minds on where the course (and training more
   generally) should go in the future.

I plan to prioritize inviting alumni for this third week, but I will
have some room for other participants who are already reasonably adept
at data analysis.  If you feel reasonably comfortable with all of the
material taught in a Software Carpentry workshop, and you're
interested in attending the third week, please drop me a line.

For this third week, we are also looking for a few
instructors/lecturers.  `Drop me an e-mail
<mailto:ctbrown@ucdavis.edu>`__ if you are a trained Software
Carpentry or Data Carpentry instructor and are interested in coming
and hanging out with us for a week to develop materials and
approaches!

--titus

p.s. Note that this year there are *no* MSU instructors at this course -
Ian Dworkin has moved to McMaster, and I'm at UC Davis now.
