Increasing postdoc pay
######################

:author: C\. Titus Brown
:tags: postdocs,salary
:date: 2016-05-25
:slug: 2016-raising-the-postdocs
:category: science

I just gave all of my postdocs a $10,000-a-year raise.

My two current postdocs all got a $10k raise over their current
salary, and the four postdocs coming on board over the next 6 months
will start at $10k over the NIH base salary we pay them already.
(This means that my starting postdocs will get something like
$52k/year, plus benefits.)

I already pay most of my grad students more than I'm required to by UC
Davis regulations.  While I'm a pretty strong believer that graduate
school *is* school, and that it's pretty good training (see `Claus
Wilke's extended discussion here
<http://serialmentor.com/blog/2013/8/31/atqeelrnfeyb3e03sycsdpl7p5zc83/>`__),
there's something to be said for enabling them to think more about
their work and less about whether or not they can afford a slightly
more comfortable life.  (I pay all my grad students the same salary,
independent of graduate program; see below.)

Why did I increase the postdoc salaries now?  I've been thinking about
it for a while, but the main reason that motivated me to do the
paperwork was `the change in US labor regulations
<http://www.nature.com/news/us-law-could-increase-postdoc-pay-and-shake-up-research-system-1.19949>`__.
There's the cold-blooded calculation that, hey, I don't want to pay
overtime; but if it were just that, I could have given smaller raises
to my existing postdocs.  A bigger factor is that I *really* don't
want the postdocs to have to think about tracking their time.  I also
hope it will decrease postdoc turnover, which can a real problem: it
takes a lot of time to recruit a new person to the lab, and if it
takes a year to recruit a postdoc and they leave sooner because the
salary sucks, well, that's really a net loss to me.

More broadly, I view my job as flying cover for my employees.  If they
worry a little bit less because of a (let's face it) measly $10k,
well, so much the better.

A while ago I decided to pay all my postdocs on the same scale; there
are some people who are good at negotiating and asking, and others who
aren't, and it's baldly unfair to listen more to the former.  (I've
had people who pushed for a raise every 6 months; I've had other
people who offered to pay me back by personal check when they were
out sick for a week.)  I'm also really uncomfortable trying to judge a
person's personal need - sure, one postdoc may have a family, and
another postdoc may look free as a bird and capable of living out of
the office (which has also happened due to low pay...), but everyone's
lives are more complicated than they appear, and it's not my place to
get that involved.  So paying everyone the same salary and explaining
that up front reduces any friction that might arise there, I think.

There's also the fact that I can afford it at the moment, between my
startup and my Moore Foundation grant.  The $10k/person increase means
that I'm paying somewhere around $80k extra per year, once you include
the increase in benefits -- basically, an entire additional postdoc's
salary.  But being the world's worst manager, I'm not sure how I will
deal with a lab with 9 people in it; a 10th would probably not have
helped there.  So maybe it's not such a bad thing to avoid hiring one
more person :).  And in the future I will simply budget it into grants.
(I do have one grant out in review at the moment where I underbudgeted;
if I get it, I'll have to supplement that with my startup.)

The interesting thing is that I didn't realize how large a salary many
of my future postdocs were turning down.  In order to justify the
raise to the admins, I asked for information on other offers the
postdocs had received - I'd heard that some of them had turned down
larger salaries, but hadn't asked for details before.  Two of my
future postdocs had offers in the $80k range; another was leaving a
postdoc that paid north of $60k (not uncommon in some fields) to come
to my lab.  I'm somewhat surprised (and frankly humbled) that they
were planning to come to my lab *before* this raise; even with this
raise, I'm not approaching what they'd already been offered!

There are some downsides for the postdocs here (although I think
they're pretty mild, all things considered).  First, I won't have as
much unbudgeted cash lying around, so supply and travel expenditures
will be a bit more constrained.  Second, I can't afford to keep them
all on for quite as long now, so some postdoc jobs may end sooner than
they otherwise would have.  Third, if they want to transition to a new
postdoc at UC Davis, they will probably have to find someone willing
to pay them the extra money - it's very hard to lower someone's salary
within an institution.  (I don't expect this to be a problem, but it's
an issue to consider.)

There are also some downsides for me that I don't think my employees
always appreciate, too.  I worry a lot - like, an awful lot - about
money.  I'm deathly afraid of overpromising employment and having to
lay off a postdoc before they have a next step, or, worse, move a grad
student to a lot of TAing.  So this salary increase puts me a little
bit more on edge, and makes me think more about writing grants, and
less about research and other, more pleasant things.  I can't help but
resent that a teensy bit.  On the flip side, that *is* my job and all
things considered I'm at a pretty awesome place in a pretty awesome gig
so *shrug*.

There may be other downsides I hadn't considered - there usually are
;) -- and upsides as well.  I'll follow up if anything interesting
happens.

--titus
