The dangers of unregulated conversing about science at conferences
##################################################################

:author: C\. Titus Brown
:tags: blogging,science,satire
:date: 2013-07-22
:slug: dangers-of-conversation-at-conferences
:category: science

(With very little apology whatsoever to `Geoffrey North
<http://www.cell.com/current-biology/fulltext/S0960-9822(13)00514-9>`__.)

----

The airplane age, in particular the advent of large, well-attended
conferences, has created a brave new world of broadcasting instant
criticism of scientific papers, for good or ill.

I think there is a clear "good" side, illustrated by cases where
papers making very radical claims on shaky grounds are published in
high-profile journals to large media acclaim. There was a good example
of this in 2010, when Science published a paper (Wolfe-Simon et al. "A
Bacterium That Can Grow by Using Arsenic Instead of Phosphorus",
Science 332, 1163-1166; published online December 2, 2010) claiming to
show that bacteria growing in a high-arsenic environment can actually
utilize arsenic instead of phosphorus, using the element to make
macromolecules such as nucleic acids.

This is obviously a very dramatic, near heretical claim, one that
potentially has important implications for the origins of life. But it
immediately evokes caution -- is such a thing even chemically
possible?? Soon after reading the paper I put that question to two
experts on such matters, who quickly responded: no, this paper is
likely wrong!

The paper was very widely covered by the general media, but also
rapidly put to the question, in particular amongst the experts I'd
called in person.

A subsequent paper in Nature, published in October last year (Elias et
al. "The molecular basis of phosphate discrimination in arsenate-rich
environments" Nature (2012) 491, 134-137) reported that the bacterium
has a phosphate transport system so discriminating that it can bind
phosphorus selectively even in very arsenate-rich environments, and
this likely explains the findings reported in the Science paper.

Here we have a healthy system operating in such a way as to correct,
in timely fashion, a mistake in the scientific literature -- the
timeliness is particularly important in such a case, as the doubts
were raised so soon after the initial media reaction, while the issue
was still very much "in the air".

But there is also, I think, a danger here, which lies in the very
speed of response, and the way that conversations are essentially
"vanity publications" -- which lack the constraints of more
conventional publishing -- they are not reviewed, and do not even have
to pass the critical eye of any editor. In principle, anyone can talk
to their friends at a conference and criticize anything -- they do not
have to have any specific expertise. And the criticism can be picked
up, advertised and amplified, for example at the bar, by those who
feel a conversation supports their agenda.

Such criticism can of course be harmful - at the least there tends to
be a "no smoke without fire" effect. And once a scientific reputation
has been tainted, it can be hard to restore confidence.

What is the solution here? How can one have a system that allows for
rapid critical assessment, but ensures any such criticism is fair and
reasonably based, not based on misunderstanding or ill-motivated? One
might argue that "crowd" effects will work their magic, weeding out
the best conversations for wider attention and working against those
that are consistently poor or prejudiced. Conversation is a curious
new medium -- a little akin to letters of old, but the dynamic is
rather different. The great letter writers tended to critical
self-revelation, and the very privacy at the time of writing (at
least) reduced the self-indulgence that some conversations are prone
to.

I am not by any means trying to argue here against "free speech" --
the publication of a paper means it is of course quite rightly open to
full scrutiny. But I do think there are dangers in a world where the
critics are less accountable than in the more "traditional" system of
peer-reviewed journals (which I well appreciate can be frustratingly
slow in processing critical feedback).

--titus
