Dear Abby: Why can't we hire computational biologists?
######################################################

:author: C\. Titus Brown
:tags: science,satire,hiring,tenure
:date: 2013-2-8
:slug: dear-abby-hiring-computational-people
:category: science

I received this letter in the mail the other day.  Can anyone help?

---

Dear Dr. Abby,

I am at a top-50 R1 research institution, and we are currently
conducting faculty hiring searches for a number of professors in
biology.  The applicant pool has been stunningly good this year, and
we have invited many fantastic future researchers.  However, I've
noticed that even though we get some excellent and strong
computational applicants, they are rarely invited to interview, even
for positions that are explicitly computational.  Those that are
invited tend to be stronger on the biology side than on the
computational side, which would mean that, even if we hired them, we
would not really be increasing our computational or data analysis
capacity here.  Yet everyone in biology, here and elsewhere, is
ostensibly looking for good computational collaborators and teachers,
because they enable a wide range of research and build substantial
granting and training capacity. Why can't we seem to interview them?

-- Perplexed in Punxsutawney

---

My response so far:

Dear Perplexed,

I've seen the same thing countless times.  If I had to guess, it's one
or more of the following.

First, computational research is considered adjunct to the main
discipline, for historical reasons, and so discipline-specific hiring
may go for the best-looking straight-discipline researchers --
biologists, in this case -- arguing that, after all, they are hiring
for that department.

Second, it is often hard for non-computational researchers to evaluate 
computational scientists.  There's a lot of computational snake oil out
there, and not all that is called "computation" is good science.
Biologists, in particular, have been bitten by this in the past, and
may be leary of hiring someone they can't personally evaluate.

Third, computational people are almost always interdisciplinary, and
interdisciplinary hiring is notoriously difficult, because often no
one department can evaluate them properly.  In fact, I would argue
that the whole interdisciplinary hiring, promotion, and tenure system
is completed effed up.  This is exacerbated in a tough job climate
where excellent straight-discipline people are available.

Fourth, often the best computational research is done in a group
that's focused on a discipline-specific problem, which means it's not
credited with first or senior authorship.  So, mature computational
researchers may simply not be competitive in the traditional single-PI
mindset that universities still have.

Fifth, good computational researchers are often hired at a more junior
level than others, and often through "friend of a friend" connections,
so the available pool may be more junior; thus they do not compete well
with more senior discipline-specific researchers who have fewer job
opportunities and must go out into open competition.

I fear your quest for more computational biology colleagues might be
hopeless; I wish I had better news.  Best of luck!

Sincerely yours,

Dr. Abby.
