E-mail is getting *really* unreliable
#####################################

:author: C\. Titus Brown
:tags: personal
:date: 2008-05-12
:slug: email-is-getting-really-unreliable
:category: personal


I've been hit by a few different e-mail-related problems over the last
few months, and it's becoming intensely frustrating.

Some servers seem to randomly drop messages from me, for no obvious
reason; at least, people don't get one message and then do get
another, a day later.  gmail may be at the center of this but it's not
clear.  (Changing my public From: address to ctb@msu.edu may have
contributed to the lossage rate, but cannot be the only cause.)

Yahoo at first decided to mark messages as spam, then drop messages,
and now likes me again.

As I write, caltech.edu seems to be bitch-slapping a select subset of
my messages.  Either they're grey-listing and waiting to forward some
messages on, or they've dropped some messages entirely.

My daily e-mail load has grown to the point where I appear to be
hand-deleting *real* messages from my inbox when my eye gets them
confused with spam or automated notices.  I know of at least two
messages that I've deleted in the last month -- I found them in my
received-not-spam folder (where I save all incoming messages) but have
no recollection of having read them.  Before this month, I can't
recall having accidentally deleted two e-mails in the last *5 years*.
And it's not like my spam filter has a high false negative rate: I
barely get any spam at all in my inbox.

Now I'm trying to start sending messages to people in my lab, and some
of them are not responding or acknowledging the messages.  Maybe
they're not getting them.  Maybe they're out to lunch.  Maybe they
don't like me, or authority, or something.  I don't want to hassle
people who don't want to respond, but I also want to make sure they
got the $!%#$#$ message!  Ah well, I will be physically there soon...

All of this goes to say that for a variety of reasons -- increasing
amounts of e-mail, increasing amount of SPAM e-mail, increasingly
random and annoying anti-spam measures implemented by the big inbox
providers -- e-mail has become unreliable enough that I have to think
about it.  Even worse, the number and variety of anti-spam measures in
play mean that neither I nor the receiver may have any ability to
affect the spam filter that is dropping e-mail (translation: I don't
know what to do to make things more reliable).

Grr.

I think the time is coming where a reputable SMTP forwarder could make
some $$; I'd be willing to pay a $ or $$ for a bonded SMTP provider!
Anything like that out there that actually works?

--titus

p.s. In a largely unrelated side note, the number of blog comment
spammers attempting to post to my blog continues to hit record highs
on a daily basis.  I've *never* approved a spam comment -- yet they
continue to try.  It's mind-bogglingly stupid and it just goes to show
that stupid behavior will continue indefinitely if it's approximately
zero-cost to the commit-ee.   Grr x 2.

So, err, drop me a line if you wrote a witty comment that didn't get
posted, and if I don't accidentally delete your e-mail I will approve
your comment.


----

**Legacy Comments**


Posted by Shannon -jj Behrens on 2008-05-15 at 16:54. 

::

   I'm with you, Titus.  A lot of my email ends up in someone else's spam
   folder.    BondedSender is what you were hinting at above.  I'm not
   sure if it works since I haven't tried it.  One of the other teams
   launched it when I was working at IronPort.

