I just heard: I got tenure because of my klout score!
#####################################################

:author: C\. Titus Brown
:tags: science,satire
:date: 2013-04-01
:slug: i-got-tenure-via-klout
:category: science

I just got off the phone with my department chair, who gave me the
good news -- I've been awarded tenure!  This great news was more than
a bit surprising, since I hadn't applied yet; I'm scheduled to submit
my tenure application in just over a year.

This is apparently a done deal: everyone from the dept to my deans to
President Simon and the Board of Trustees has signed off, so as soon
as I get the letter in the mail, I can call myself "Associate Professor"
instead of "Assistant".  It means that my job security is basically
assured as long as I stay clear of felonies.

Now, normally tenure is granted only after a long, arduous process
involving lots of paperwork, letters from external professors, and
multiple levels of review.  In my case, though, Michigan State decided
to proceed directly based on my `klout score
<http://klout.com/home>`__.  Klout scores are based on a numerical
measure of `social media significance
<http://www.wired.com/business/2012/08/klout-updates/>`__, including
Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn.  The resulting score is increasingly
being used to `decide whether or not someone is an "influencer"
<http://www.wired.com/business/2012/04/ff_klout/>`__.  Rumor has it
that sites like `GitHub <http://github.com/>`__ (see esp `GitHub
Resume <resume.github.com/?ctb>`__) and `Stack Overflow
<http://stackoverflow.com>`__ are important in the tech industry, but
no such similar sites are really much used in academia.

Klout itself has not been used much in academia, apart from `some
interesting experiments
<http://chronicle.com/blogs/wiredcampus/florida-state-u-instructor-grades-students-based-on-klout-scores/39482>`__.
First, there are many concerns as to what a low klout score really
means, in particular -- does it mean you just don't do much social
media stuff, or are otherwise below klout's radar? Or does it mean
that you're active but not very influential?  Second, academia has
traditionally relied on well-established metrics like citations and
impact factor to evaluate reputation, not to mention letters of
reference -- although various numerical metrics such as "selectivity"
are increasingly `challenged as being less relevant
<http://library.queensu.ca/ojs/index.php/IEE/article/view/4351>`__
upon detailed scrutiny.  Third, there's a general feeling or belief
that `while scholarly contributions should be measured more broadly
than they are <http://elife.elifesciences.org/content/2/e00452>`__,
outreach and education are ancillary to direct research contributions.

I wasn't even aware Klout was on MSU's radar screen, frankly!  When I
talked to my chair, he said that he was surprised too -- apparently
this is an initiative by the college deans and above to try to connect
Michigan State U. with the wider community, by promoting influential
people.  I turned out to be one of the top three kloutish folk on
campus (@captain_primate is another, I'm sure; but I don't know the
identity of the third) and since I wasn't yet tenured they decided to
grant me tenure largely based on my klout score.

While I've `publicly expressed reservations about the utility of
social media for things like tenure in the past
<http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/why-i-blog-2013-version.html>`__, and
even `directly bashed klout
<https://twitter.com/ctitusbrown/statuses/290145593358180352>`__, I'm
going to have to take all that back: klout is not only saving me from
lots of annoying paperwork, but really points to the growing effect
that social media is having on the "real world" of employment considerations.

Note that MSU has `now posted revised guidelines for tenure
<www.msu.edu/youcanthaveit>`__.

One final thought -- I think it just goes to show you that Mike Eisen
really is right when he says that `high impact publications are no
longer necessary for tenure
<http://www.michaeleisen.org/blog/?p=911>`__.  Amazing.

Go Klout!

--titus
