John Ringo is a caricature of a wingnut
#######################################

:author: C\. Titus Brown
:tags: books
:date: 2008-04-19
:slug: john-ringo-is-a-caricature
:category: personal


I read a lot of total crap, and one of my recurring crap authors has
been John Ringo.  He's a total nutjob politically, but he writes good
battle scenes and is an enjoyable read once you cut through the
nonsense.  Still, I'm having a tough time getting through the opening
chapters of `The Last Centurion
<http://www.webscription.net/chapters/1416555536/1416555536_toc.htm>`__.
In this book, Ringo constructs a near-future world where Hillary
Clinton is president, global *cooling* is the problem, and the
chemicals from processed food and big farming are life saving.

Let's take those one at a time.

One of Ringo's favorite tropes is that the left, and the Clintons
especially, are what's wrong with America.  It's hard to convey the
dripping scorn with which he discusses these topics, but it involves a
lot of naughty words.  In this book, Hillary Clinton (or a straw woman
facsimile thereof) is president through the Big Chill and the
simultaneous deadly bird flu outbreak, and she makes every mistake
possible.  While Hillary Clinton is not my favorite politician, it's
worth noting that our current president (who can do little wrong in
Ringo's eyes) has *actually* made almost every mistake possible, and
this makes Ringo's text unbearably difficult to read.  If Ringo is
hoping to even tell a good story, much less sway anyone's opinion, he'd
be better off with less in the way of textual histrionics.

Another one of Ringo's tropes is that the global warming hypothesis is
nonsense.  Not only does he mention this frequently, but he literally
pauses in the middle of his books to deliver four page diatribes on
the subject.  In this latest book, Ringo makes the next big climate
change event a major solar COOLING, which has predictable effects on
the food supply. Now, I'm a scientist and a lefty, and I've even
worked on science relevant to climate change, so presumably (by
Ringo's criteria) I am unfit to comment, being moderately
knowledgeable.  But when your social commentary depends *entirely* on
fiction, it loses any relevance and becomes a distraction.

The most interesting novelty in this book (which presumably will
become another abortive series, to join the ranks of his other five
unfinished series?) is the device where American lives are saved by
having eaten so many processed foods.  As far as I can tell, the idea
is that eating processed foods conveys resistance to chicken flu, and
this leads to a dramatically greater survival rate in America.  I'm
not sure why this device is in the book, unless it's another imaginary
nail in Ringo's imaginary coffin of liberalism.  Whyever it's there,
it's entertainingly stupid -- there's plenty of evidence that weird,
random chemicals do weird, random things to your DNA, and that's one
reason why cancer is so prevalent.  There's no reason at all to
believe that these chemicals would somehow "cancel out" bird flu.  But
what do I know?  I'm just a molecular freakin' biologist...

Combine all that with Ringo's inimitable writing style in which no
breasts are too big, no hero goes unfucked by multiple
(large-breasted) women, and no terrorist goes unpunished, and these
books are truly a piece of work.  I do *not*, however, mean "of art".
In fact, this last book is so outlandish that I'm actually becoming a
bit suspicious of Ringo's sincerity.  It's hard to read such complete
and utter crap without thinking that perhaps the author is secretly
making fun of the very viewpoints he is espousing.  But it's been
a consistent trend towards lunacy thus far, so I'm inclined to believe
that he's actually somewhat sincere.

Anyway, here's my judgement: Ringo's latest book is masturbatory
fodder for hard right wingers, and it's becoming increasingly
difficult to enjoy his books if you're not actually lobotomized.
Luckily that ensures him an 18% market.

--titus


----

**Legacy Comments**


Posted by Greg Wilson on 2008-04-19 at 07:12. 

::

   It's been scary to watch from this side of the border: Weber's endless
   homage to "Starship Troopers" gets Ringo a larger audience, Ringo's
   sales encourage publishers to give outright racists like Kratman a
   platform, and anyone who calls them on it is branded a weak-kneed
   liberal or worse.


Posted by Erich Schwarz on 2008-04-19 at 09:39. 

::

   "... there's plenty of evidence that weird, random chemicals do weird,
   random things to your DNA, and that's one reason why cancer is so
   prevalent."    Weird random chemicals do indeed score positive in the
   Ames test.    However, so do weird random NATURAL chemicals in food!
   As Ames found out, to his considerable surprise, when he did that
   experiment:    <a href="http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9255573">ht
   tp://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9255573</a>    As far as I can tell,
   there's no particular reason to assume that cancer rates are higher
   because of processed foods per se.  The modern lifestyle things I know
   about that increase cancer risk are:    smoking tobacco    drinking
   heavily (may enhance throat and esophageal cancer)    postponing
   childbearing, for women (keeps mammary epithelium dedifferentiated
   longer into adult life, may thus enhance risk of breast cancer)
   sleeping around, for women (HPV infection is much more likely if you
   don't marry and stay monogamous early, and HPV is definitely a
   carcinogen)    ... but somehow I don't expect a left-leaning sci-fi
   novel rebutting Ringo to extol the praises of a Mormon-like society.
   ;)


Posted by Erich Schwarz on 2008-04-19 at 09:46. 

::

   Greg Wilson wrote: "Ringo's sales encourage publishers to give
   outright racists like Kratman a platform..."    Whatever negative
   traits Kratman may actually have, I am not sure that somebody so
   unabashedly in love with mixed-race Panamanian women (e.g., his wife)
   can be convincingly classified as a racist.  Is there some specific
   evidence that he is one?


Posted by Titus Brown on 2008-04-19 at 12:50. 

::

   Erich, it's true that the causal link between weird random chemicals
   and cancer has not been firmly established, but (as one example)
   acrylamide, produced in french fry vats, is a known carcinogen... The
   causal link between a particular food or method of production has not
   been established, but we know that certain foods contain certain
   carcinogens and we know that carcinogens cause cancer...    Greg, I
   don't think of Kratman as a racist.  More a fascist.  But he's not a
   good enough writer for me to read him under any circumstances.
   Weber is an interesting problem.  I've read pretty much everything
   he's written, and I think he is in many ways much more moderate than
   Heinlein.  He's not as good a writer as RAH, though, and some of his
   social commentary is at least plausible.    All science fiction
   writers construct their own worlds, of course.  I just have a hard
   time reading those that come to radical conclusions based upon their
   own inability to construct a believable world.


Posted by Erich Schwarz on 2008-04-20 at 16:15. 

::

   The operational definition of a carcinogen is some chemical that can
   induce cancers in vitro or in lab animals, provided in fairly high
   doses.  What Ames has shown is that this definition somewhat
   counterintuitively applies to a great many chemicals found in nature,
   as part of unaltered foodstuffs such as vegetables.    It doesn't
   follow, necessarily, that you should go eating French fries like some
   deranged emulator of <i>Supersize Me</i>, while neglecting your leafy
   greens -- my inexpert guess is that this'd indeed be a Bad Idea, and
   that leafy greens really are likely to be better for you (at least
   partially because of their magnesium content alone).    But I think
   it's fair to say that what edible chemicals really raise human cancer
   risk, on the margin in real life, aren't as slam-dunk to determine as
   one would like.    Parenthetically, the Ames I'm citing is the guy who
   invented the Ames test in the first place, and showed that it could be
   used as an efficient test for carcinogens in foods.  While he may be
   wrong to point out the high noise-to-signal ratio in his own test, he
   at least does have some scientific credibility.


Posted by Noah Gift on 2008-04-28 at 00:46. 

::

   I had no idea who John Ringo was, but I looked up his bio and it said
   he is a commentator for Fox News, which would explain your blog post.
   One thing I fail to understand about general Republican ideology is
   why spending trillions of dollars on war is fiscally conservative,
   forget the questions of morality.     Oh, on the subject of Bush's
   incompetence, I recently had many of my private thoughts articulated
   from a very surprising source, Donald Knuth:    <a href="http://www-
   cs-staff.stanford.edu/~uno/iaq.html">http://www-cs-
   staff.stanford.edu/~uno/iaq.html</a>

