Physics ain't biology (and vice versa)
######################################

:author: C\. Titus Brown
:tags: biology,physics
:date: 2012-09-03
:slug: physics-aint-biology-and-vice-versa
:category: science

I've been invited to present at the `Extremely Large Databases (XLDB)
2012 conference
<http://www-conf.slac.stanford.edu/xldb2012/ProgramC.asp>`__ as a
practicing biologist who occasionally speaks with physicists, and I'm
trying to come up with something to say that will explain why
physicists and biologists don't often collaborate all that well.

Here are some guesses.

---

1. Biology has only weakly predictive theory.

Physicists tend to rely on a lot of math, because over the last two
centuries it has turned out that relatively simple theoretical
assumptions can lead to a surprisingly accurate version of reality.  I
don't think it would be wrong to say that you can view much of physics
in the 1900s as a search for simple theoretical principles that
correspond with observational data.  The resulting theory has been an
amazing success in many ways, and no one would even think of trying to
interpret particle accelerator data without the aid of the Standard
Model.  In physics theory has turned out to be very *predictive*, in
that you can make specific predictions based on numerical calculations
and voila, upon looking you will find a match.

Biology, on the other hand, has no such strong theory.  Evolutionary
theory and ecological principles seem to describe some parts of
biological reality quite well, but it is difficult to imagine coming
out with very specific predictions from these theories and principles.
Since evolution *is* the basis of biology (cue famous `Dobzhansky
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Theodosius_Dobzhansky>`__, "Nothing in
makes sense except in the light of evolution"), and evolutionary
processes tend to construct stunningly functional solutions that
nonetheless look like Rube Goldberg contraptions, a lot of biological
detail looks like it has been created by an utterly insane genius.

There are lots of fun implications of this difference, including the
fact that mathematical models are hard to apply in biology, and that a
lot of biology inextricably involves what physicists (and the more
frustratingly close-minded biologists) call "stamp collecting" --
looking for new data that *doesn't* fit whatever mental or mathematical
or computational model you have.  (RNAi, anyone?)  I have news for
you all -- stamp collecting is only boring when you have some freakin'
idea of what the next stamp is going to look like!

Danny Hillis wrote an `excellent article in 1993, "Why physicists like
models, and why biologists should
<http://longnow.org/essays/why-physicists-models-and-why-biologists-should/>`__
in which he relates a quote from Richard Feynman:

   The late Richard Feynman, a physicist, once warned me never to
   compare physics to biology in front of a biologist: "It just makes
   them mad." He was joking, but he was also right.

The article goes on to talk about models, and models, and makes some
really good points.  Honestly I should just point people at that...

2. Biology is increasingly integrative, rather than reductive.

I've known some awesomely intelligent physicists, and even published
with one or two.  (I'm happy to name drop if anyone is interested...?)
I've also known some really brilliant biologists.  They are generally
quite different types of people.  Physicists tend to seek simple
principles that they complexify as needed; biologists tend to seek
broadly inclusive stories that they simply as necessary.  If this is
an accurate generalization, I betcha it comes back to the Rube Goldberg
nature of biology: to extract general principles of evolution or
ecology or development, you need to look at immense range of very
confusing data; in physics, it seems to be possible to look at much
smaller sets of data.  Neither one is easy but I think the mental
shift necessary to encompass biological behavior is tough for many
physicists to make.

It is also the case that biology encompasses an immense range of
disciplines, from ecology to molecular biology to animal husbandry.
This is no different from physics, which runs the gamut from deep
theory such as string theory, to solid state physics, to protein
modeling, to... well, lots of things.  I don't know why any physicist
would expect a biologist to pick up physics in a few conversations,
and I think the same expectation should be applied to physicists who
are trying to pick up some biology: it's not going to be quick.

3. Career structure and lab management is just... different.

In physics, postdocs are considered larval faculty, and getting the
PhD and moving on is much more of a selective step than in biology.
In biology, getting a PhD can be easier -- often it involves a lot of
mindless repetition in the lab, followed by writing the results up in
collaboration with your advisor -- while the true selective transition
is the postdoc to faculty step, which relatively few people make.  (At
this point I should perhaps mention that I have one of those biology
PhDs, and yes, I did a lot of mindless repetition in the lab. I'm not
knocking it; it's necessary.  But it's different from what I would
have done in most of the physics labs I considered joining.)
Moreover, labs in biology tend to be run by one faculty member,
whereas at least in my experience with physics at Caltech and Stony
Brook and Ohio State, there is a tendency to work in larger groups
with multiple profs.

These differences may stem from the labor-intensive nature of much of
biology; the different funding approaches available and used in the
different fields; the cultures of medicine and ecology and evolution
vs the cultures of physics; etc.  I'm not sure. But in my not-so-limited
observation it's very different between biology and physics.

The most important *effect*, though, is that postdocs are not
*required* to be very independent researchers in biology labs.  They
are beholden to their advisor, they aren't forced to do much "broad
thinking", and they're often treated as semi-slave labor.  Many of
them push through this, either by force of personality or by luck of
the draw in their boss, but many don't.  This leads to science that is
often driven by the "big boss", who is often a very important and well
funded person, and necessarily limits the diversity of opinions and
approaches.

I don't know how much of this contributes to the `theorist for hire
<http://scientopia.org/blogs/guestblog/2012/01/18/theorist-for-hire/>`__
phenomenon, but I betcha it's a significant component.

4. Data generation and analysis is handled differently.

Narayan Desai pointed out to me a while ago that big data generation
in biology is happening in individual labs, while often big data
generation in physics is happening more centrally -- particle physics,
astronomy, and the like, tend to have large instruments that generate
the data, which is then filtered down to analysis groups.  This is in
part because of the robust collaborations between phenomenologists
(theoreticians who analyze data) and experimentalists in physics,
which relies on the strong theory that is available.  In biology,
however, individual labs and collaborations are generating big chunks
of data, and they are generally being analyzed within those labs and
collaborations.  The lucky collaborations include good
bioinformaticians and computational biologists, but there aren't
enough to go around.

This leads to what I've been calling a "sick culture" of biology and
bioinformatics, where there is a surprisingly small, low-diversity
ecology of computational tools and approaches.  You don't find
anything like it in physics, as far as I can tell, and this is where
I'd most like to adopt physics practices.

A friend who recently visited did point out that the sophisticated
computational approaches as used in physics are no panacea -- he's
used to attending talks about "robust approaches" that are obviously
so tweaked that there's no way to tell if they're actually robustly
useful.

---

That all having been said, I have been happily talking with and
collaborating with physicists on my biology for ... decades, now.  The
most successful ones are the ones that approach biology with a certain
amount of humbleness and willingness to learn completely new things;
immersion therapy might be the best approach for those who have the
time, as you can tell from looking at the careers of people like
Hopfield and Delbruck.  But that's not surprising -- the most
successful biologists seem to be people who beg, borrow, and steal
approaches from whatever field they need to.

I welcome input from people who have experience on one side of the
fence or the other, or those who are straddling it.  This is a tough
subject to opine about and I'm happy to have my opinions be falsified
or subjected to the light of alternate experience.

--titus

p.s. I'm writing this post from my own personal experience, and I'm
certainly being chauvinistic to broad swaths of biology.  Fields like
genetics and ecology have been making use of models for decades.  But
the application of math and modeling to really squishy stuff like
development and evo-devo has been very limited in utility, as far as I
can tell.  And we need it there, too.

p.p.s. Forgot to say -- thanks to Erich Schwarz and Ethan White for
their comments on an early version of this post!
