PyCon 2013 and Codes of Conduct, more generally
###############################################

:author: C\. Titus Brown
:tags: python
:date: 2013-03-20
:slug: pycon-2013-and-codes-of-conduct
:category: python

The tech community is messed up in da head, yo.

Several times since Steve Holden's `I'm Sorry
<http://holdenweb.blogspot.com/2012/12/im-sorry.html>`__ post I've written
long blog posts about my own views on codes of conduct and
professional behavior, including the views informed by some of my own
extraordinarily embarrassing transgressions.  I never felt that the
end result had much to add to the conversation so I never posted any
of 'em.  Plus, they were really embarrassing transgressions.

If you want to know, until last week, I was fairly publicly on the
fence about the proposed Python Software Foundation code of conduct
(which is not yet public, but is based on the `Ubuntu CoC
<http://www.ubuntu.com/project/about-ubuntu/conduct>`__, I think)
because I was worried about CoCs being used to whack people
inappropriately, due to nonspecificity and other things.

Three things happened at PyCon 2013 that made me decide to (a) change
my mind and (b) post this short note saying so.

First, I came to PyCon with two women colleagues, one of whom was
harassed nearly constantly by men, albeit on a low level.  Both of
them are friendly people who are willing to engage at both a personal
and a technical level with others, and apparently that signals to some
that they can now feel free to comment on "hotness", proposition them,
and otherwise act like 14 year old guys.  As one friend said,
(paraphrased) "I'd be more flattered that they seem to want to sleep
with me, if they'd indicated any interest in me as a human being --
you know, asked me why I was at PyCon, what I did, what I worked on,
what I thought about things.  But they didn't."  (Honestly, if I were
to judge by that reported set of interactions, any genetic component
to such behavior would be weeded out in approximately one generation,
'cause such guys would only be able to reproduce through anonymous
donations to sperm banks.)

Second, at an event for a subcommunity that I help not run, `bad shit
happened
<http://pycon.blogspot.com/2013/03/pycons-response-to-inapropriate.html>`__.
At the same event, derogatory and not-fun sexist remarks were made,
publicly and loudly, about a presenter.  This made the main organizer
for that event feel horrible, and put a damper on the whole event.

Third, `this happened
<http://butyoureagirl.com/14015/forking-and-dongle-jokes-dont-belong-at-tech-conferences/>`__.
As with #2, I found `PyCon's response
<http://pycon.blogspot.com/2013/03/pycon-response-to-inappropriate.html>`__
perfectly appropriate, which makes me much happier about the way PyCon
specifically and the PSF in general are likely to enforce any code of
conduct in the future.  As for the person who posted Twitter pics
identifying the men she felt were being sexist, I am not very upset by
her actions, because she is not an official representative of PyCon or
the PSF, and she did not post anonymously, so she is taking
responsibility for her actions -- unlike the people `harassing Jesse
Noller <https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=5408443>`__ for doing his
effin' job.  I do reject the notion that Adria speaks for me in the
particulars, and I would guess that her claim to speak for all future
women is similarly rejected by many women.  Again, **PyCon is not
responsible for her tweet or her picture, and they should not be held
accountable in any way for it; that's her personal action**.  (I'm
more upset by `the company that took this to the extent of actually
firing someone over it
<https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=5398681>`__, and I'm really glad
my employer (Michigan State University) has rules, procedures, and
formal hearings -- if they fire me, it will be after a certain amount
of due process and not due to what is presumably Internet hearsay.)

In the end, the latter two incidents are completely overshadowed by
the first, though.  I'm not the parent or guardian of either of my
colleagues, and I suspect they would similarly reject the idea that I
speak for either of them - they're both perfectly capable of telling
people what they think, frankly (and I would love to be an audience
for some of *those* conversations).  But, as both a visible member of
the Python community and as the father of two small girls, I am
appalled at the second-hand reports of male behavior.  I'm
particularly appalled at the systemic low-level harassment that seems
to be considered normal behavior by some.  It's not cool, it's not
fun, and it doesn't even have the dubious virtue of being effective.

In summary, 

1) GOOD JOB, PYCON.  The way the incidents were officially handled was
   really well done and speaks well of the people we have chosen to
   run PyCon.

2) We need codes of conduct because they provide some minimal
   guidelines for people that (apparently) need 'em, because they
   can't figure out how to tie their own shoelaces without such
   guidelines.

3) As a community, we need to change the way we treat women, because
   my daughters will TASER YOU ALL INTO OBLIVION in 10-20 years if we
   don't.

--titus

p.s. Sorry, no comments.  Go blog 'em and I'll link to the blog posts,
just send them to @ctitusbrown on Twitter.
