Software Licensing
##################

:author: C\. Titus Brown
:tags: python,programming,bioinformatics
:date: 2007-09-29
:slug: software-licensing
:category: science


This month the newly minted biology-in-python mailing list erupted
into a `discussion of licenses
<http://lists.idyll.org/pipermail/biology-in-python/2007-September/thread.html>`__.
There was some confusion about the goal of the discussion, for which
I'm largely responsible: we didn't make it clear that we were talking
about licenses for code and content posted on the `bio.scipy.org
<http://bio.scipy.org>`__ community Web site, so people were worried
that we were trying to dictate license choices for all
Python/bioinformatics software!  Not at all! Anyway, I'm happy with
the decision that we've posted, which is to place tutorial/example
code under the BSD license, and discussion under Creative
Commons/attribution.

A number of really interesting posts came through on this subject:
Bruce Southey posted a number of interesting links, including `Would
Dostoevsky use the GPL?
<http://lists.idyll.org/pipermail/biology-in-python/2007-September/000140.html>`__
and `Maintaining Permissive-Licensed Files in a GPL-Licensed Project
<http://www.softwarefreedom.org/resources/2007/gpl-non-gpl-collaboration.html>`__.  Josh Wilcox posted about a `"grace period" hack <http://lists.idyll.org/pipermail/biology-in-python/2007-September/000164.html>`__ in which, to quote, ::

  In addition to the terms of the GNU General Public License, this
  licence also comes with the added permission that, if you become
  obligated to release a derived work under this licence (as per
  section 2.b), you may delay the fulfillment of this obligation for
  up to 12 months ("grace period").  If you are obligated to release
  code under section 2.b of this licence, you are obligated to release
  it under these same terms, including the 12-month grace period
  clause.

This is an interesting idea but I have no idea if, in this case,
companies would care at all: we're talking about tutorial and example
code here, not real software.

I also found it extremely interesting to watch the dynamics between
the `free-as-in-beer and free-as-in-speech people
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gratis_versus_Libre#Free_as_in_free_beer_versus_free_as_in_free_speech>`__.
I'm currently willing to release software under either license -- I
relicensed twill from GPL to BSD with the last release, for example --
but I have very little sympathy with the idea that companies *should*
be able to take my code, close it, modify it, and resell it.
Nonetheless I understand that competing ideologies exist and I'm
willing to accomodate them as best I can.  (Conveniently for my
leanings both of the universities I work for, Caltech and MSU, demand
that work-related software be released under the GPL.)  Watching
people consistently misrepresent their positions -- I assume they did
so knowingly -- as "the GPL is free-er than the BSD!" and "the BSD is
free-er than the GPL!" -- was very interesting and informative.  (I
would put it this way: the GPL restricts software use in specific
ways, with the ultimate goal of increasing the freedom to use all
derivatives of that software.)

Anyway, the list conversation got a bit long, and after I received a
number of complaints about how annoying the list was becoming, I ended
the discussion `by fiat
<http://lists.idyll.org/pipermail/biology-in-python/2007-September/000169.html>`__:
I declared that we should either stop discussing licenses for 6
months, or we should move ongoing discussion to a new list.  Enough
people expressed interest that I created a new list, `bip-admin
<http://lists.idyll.org/pipermail/biology-in-python/2007-September/000173.html>`__,
to contain further admin discussion for bio.scipy.org.  (I realized
later that ``meta-bip`` would have been a better name.  Alas, renaming
mailman lists is not trivial.)

One of the most frustrating things about the license discussion was
that we really have no content whatsoever on bio.scipy.org, and here
we were discussing how to handle all of this nonexistent content
rather than writing some!  I am both amused and horrified at the
ability of people (including myself!) to talk about procedure and
protocol endlessly while failing to actually do useful work.  I guess
it's the human condition -- heck, Og and Boog probably argued about
the proper protocol for deciding whose turn it was to go get more
firewood, back when we lived in caves...

--titus


----

**Legacy Comments**


Posted by Erich Schwarz on 2007-09-30 at 18:20. 

::

   <i>I am both amused and horrified at the ability of people (including
   myself!) to talk about procedure and protocol endlessly while failing
   to actually do useful work.</i>    Cases in point:    "Everybody wants
   to save the earth; nobody wants to help Mom do the dishes."  --P.J.
   O'Rourke.    "Visualize! using your turn signal." --Anonymous bumper-
   sticker author.


Posted by Titus Brown on 2007-10-01 at 14:42. 

::

   see also    <a href="http://kerneltrap.org/mailarchive/openbsd-
   misc/2007/9/1/153822">http://kerneltrap.org/mailarchive/openbsd-
   misc/2007/9/1/153822</a>

