TGAC, ELIXIR, and GOBLET - Oh my!
#################################

:author: C\. Titus Brown
:tags: science,training
:date: 2013-11-11
:slug: tgac-elixir-goblet-oh-my
:category: science

I'm on my way back from a great week in England.  I spent most of the
week in Norwich at `The Genome Analysis Center (t-gaaaaaaaack)
<@@>`__, hosted by Vicky Schneider-Gricar.  I gave `a talk <@@>`__,
taught two workshops together with Aleksandra Pawlik -- one `for
biologists <@@>`__ and one `for bioinformaticians <@@>`__ -- and met
quite a few people, including Sergey @X, Bernardo XX@, Dan MacLean,
and Mario C@@.  It was the usual poster-trip for science: good food,
great company, wonderful discussions, and lots of fun.  I also got to
spend a day in London wandering about, which was really the first time
I've explored London on my own; while there, I even serendipitously
met up with `The Kaitlin Thaney <@@>`__ of Mozilla Science Labs.

One of the highlights of the visit was the chance to participate in an
`ELIXIR <@@>`__ meeting, hosted by TGAC.  ELIXIR is a European
bioinformatics organization, with part of their mission focused on
training.  Several of the ELIXIR attendees also stuck around for a
`GOBLET <http://mygoblet.org>`__ meeting; GOBLET stands for the Global
Organization for Learning, Education, and Training, and is in no way
connected to Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire.  I had to miss the
GOBLET meeting but I got a chance to meet many of the attendees.

The ELIXIR meeting (which I did attend) was all about how to
coordinate on training and material development.  ELIXIR is not, alas,
a global organization, but there were people attending from Australia,
Israel, and North America to help connect to those communities-- I got
to represent all of North America, including `Software Carpentry <@@>`__ :).

The main thing that struck me is how little coordination already
exists.  We talked about some issues, like undergraduate and graduate
programs, where I have little knowledge or primary interest, but we
also talked about issues like common material development, sharing
data sets that are good for training, reusable or syndicatable
training materials, train-the-trainer initiatives, a map between
standard needs in training and training materials, shared training
methods, assessment, etc.  Somewhat oddly for a group of hi-tech
folks, there was very little social media "presence" and little
awareness of resources like `biostar <@@>`__.

One personal take-away was this: the bioinformatics post-grad
education field (think: workshops & "remedial" training in data
analysis) is ripe for some sharing, and I'm planning to participate in
and/or run some materials and technology development workshops on this
subject. (This was one of my conclusions from `our SESYNC workshop on
what to teach biologists about computing <http://ivory.idyll.org/blog/2013-sesync-meeting.html>`__, so not too surprising!)

Another take-away was: I should sign up for `GOBLET <@@>`__ and
participate in their development of a global network of trainers
and trainers-who-train-trainers.  Maybe we can get some good social
media connections going there, too, and start to draw people in; we
need active researchers to participate in training more than they do,
and GOBLET strikes me as something that could help pull them in.

And, finally, there's something I hope to do more of: provide
opinionated suggestions for "good enough" software and training
approaches, to help guide people through the existing melange.  For
example, Software Carpentry chose Python as a good-enough language;
we've bringing IPython Notebook to people's attention; and Greg Wilson
has been pioneering an online trainer-training course that sounds
really good.  These kinds of "suggested practice" are becoming
increasingly important as software and training expands and
diversified, and bioinformatics training needs this.

--titus
