A Tale of a Bug
# tags python

or, "those python-dev people are awesome."

My experience with the Python bug tracker has been pretty sparse and
largely limited to some of the eternaissues like "make HTMLParser deal
with even more broken HTML" that never really get resolved because
they're not very important and don't have a champion.  So when I filed
`this minor bug report on test_distutils
<http://bugs.python.org/issue7408>`__ I was not expecting it to be on
anyone's top 10 list.

I filed the bug report at 17:21 and dropped a note to python-dev.

Within an hour or so, several people reported that they could not
duplicate it, and one person had reported that they *could*, on the
mailing list.

At 19:58 Ned Deily reported through the bug tracker that he could dupe it.

By 20:36, Tarek had a suggestion for something to try (that wasn't the
problem, but never mind).

By 21:58, Ned had tracked it down to a UNIX-y flavah difference (BSD
vs SysV) in the way group ownership was set on files.

And at 22:30, Tarek had fixed the problem (by dropping the assertions).

So, umm, wow, that was quick!  Just over 5 hours, across at least two
continents, on a Sunday...

---

I was impressed by how many people chipped in to get a broad spectrum
view of things, how quickly some hypotheses were generated & in the
end how quickly the issue was resolved -- for a relatively minor problem
in one corner of the test suite that didn't show up on any of the
buildbots.

I'd bet that part of this speedy response is because Tarek Ziade has
taken on stewardship of the distutils code.  If so, this highlights
how important it is to have people who feel responsible for various
bips and bobs of the stdlib & just do whatever needs to be done.

Oh, and it also highlights the value of continuous integration across
many machines; I saw the problem because I was running tests inside
pony-build in a certain way on a Mac OS X 10.5 machine, and the error
wasn't tripped in the 10.6 buildbot.

--titus
